Flux GA release spec and long term support pledge (#3254)
fluxcd/flux2: docs/release/controllers.md

If a security fix requires a breaking change, then a minor release will provide the fix.

We expect users to be running the latest patch release of a given minor release as soon as the
controller release is included in a Flux patch release.

### Minor releases

Minor releases are intended for backwards compatible feature additions and improvements.
Note that breaking changes may occur if required by a security vulnerability fix.

In addition, minor releases are used when updating Kubernetes dependencies such
as `k8s.io/api` from one minor version to another.

In effect, this means a new minor version will at least be released for all Flux
controllers approximately every four months, following each Kubernetes minor version release.
To properly validate the controllers against the latest Kubernetes version,
we typically allocate a time window of around two weeks for end-to-end testing of Flux controllers.

It is worth noting that in certain scenarios where project dependencies are not in sync with
the Kubernetes version or conflicts arise, this two-week timeframe may prove insufficient,

> requiring additional time to address the issues appropriately.

Reviewer: I feel this should probably be moved to the release cadence section, and link to instead. Basically the same approach as I suggested in the `flux.md` document.

### Major releases

Major releases are intended for drastic changes in the controller behaviour or security stance.

A controller major release will be announced ahead of time throughout all communication channels,
and a support window of one year will be provided for the previous major version.

## Release cadence

> Flux controllers are at least released at the same rate as Kubernetes, following their cadence of three

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Flux controllers are _at least_ released at the same rate as Kubernetes, following their cadence of three
```

to emphasize this more, as I read over it (again).

The Flux controllers are 
[Kubernetes operators](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/operator/),
each controller has its own Git repository and release cycle.

Controller repositories and their interdependencies:

1. [fluxcd/source-controller](https://github.com/fluxcd/source-controller)
2. [fluxcd/kustomize-controller](https://github.com/fluxcd/kustomize-controller) (imports `fluxcd/source-controller/api`)
3. [fluxcd/helm-controller](https://github.com/fluxcd/helm-controller) (imports `fluxcd/source-controller/api`)
4. [fluxcd/notification-controller](https://github.com/fluxcd/notification-controller)
5. [fluxcd/image-reflector-controller](https://github.com/fluxcd/image-reflector-controller)
6. [fluxcd/image-automation-controller](https://github.com/fluxcd/image-automation-controller) (imports `fluxcd/source-controller/api` and `fluxcd/image-reflector-controller/api`)

## API versioning 

The Flux APIs (Kubernetes CRDs) follow the
[Kubernetes API versioning](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/#api-versioning) scheme.

### Alpha version

An alpha version API e.g. `v1alpha1` is considered experimental and should be used on
test environments only.

> The schema of objects may change in incompatible ways in a later controller release.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The schema of objects may change in incompatible ways in a later API version.
```

This aligns the wording with the one in the "beta version" section.

The Custom Resources may require editing and re-creating after a CRD update.

An alpha version API becomes deprecated once a subsequent alpha or beta API version is released.

> A deprecated alpha version is subject to removal after a three months period.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A deprecated alpha version is subject to removal after a three month period.
```

An alpha API is introduced when its proposal reaches the  `implementable` phase in the
[Flux RFC process](https://github.com/fluxcd/flux2/tree/main/rfcs).
We encourage users to try out the alpha APIs and provide feedback
(e.g. on CNCF Slack or in the form of GitHub issues/discussions)
which is extremely valuable during early stages of development.

### Beta version

A beta version API e.g. `v2beta1` is considered well-tested and safe to use in production.

The schema of objects may change in incompatible ways in a subsequent beta or stable API version.
The Custom Resources may require editing after a CRD update for which migration instructions will be
provided as part of the controller changelog.

A beta version API becomes deprecated once a subsequent beta or stable API version is released. 
A deprecated beta version is subject to removal after a six months period.

### Stable version

> A stable version API e.g. `v2` is considered feature complete.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A stable API version, e.g. `v2`, is considered feature complete.
```

Any changes to the object schema do not require editing or re-creating of Custom Resources.
Schema fields can't be removed, only new fields can be added with a default value that
doesn't affect the controller's current behaviour.

> A stable version API becomes deprecated once a subsequent stable version is released.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A stable API version becomes deprecated once a subsequent stable version is released.
```

> Stable API versions are not subject to removal in any future release of a controller major version.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Stable API versions are not subject to removal in any future release within a controller major version.
```

Makes it clearer that we're talking about a single major version and not about the possibility that a stable API version may be removed in a subsequent major controller version.

In effect, this means that for as long as Flux `v2` is being maintained, all the stable API versions 
will be supported.

## Controller versioning

The Flux controllers and their Go API packages are released by following the
[Go module version numbering](https://go.dev/doc/modules/version-numbers) conventions:

> - `vX.Y.Z-RC.W` release candidates e.g. `v1.0.0-RC.1`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `vX.Y.Z-rc.W` release candidates e.g. `v1.0.0-rc.1`
```
This is how we called releases up until now.

- `vX.Y.Z` stable releases e.g. `v1.0.0`

The API versioning and controller versioning are indirectly related. For example,
a source-controller minor release `v1.1.0` can introduce a new API version
`v1beta1` for a Kind `XRepository` in the `source.toolkit.fluxcd.io` group.

### Release candidates

Release candidates are intended for testing new features or improvements before a final release.

In most cases, a maintainer will publish a release candidate of a controller for Flux users
to tests it on their staging clusters. Release candidates are not meant to be deployed in production
unless advised to do so by a maintainer.

### Patch releases

Patch releases are intended for critical bug fixes to the latest minor version, such as addressing security
vulnerabilities or fixes to severe problems with no workaround.

Patch releases do not contain breaking changes, feature additions or any type of user-facing changes.

> If a CVE fix requires a breaking change, then a minor release will provide the fix.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a security fix requires a breaking change, then a minor release will provide the fix.
```
Makes it more explicit that we're talking about security fixes here and not about CVEs in particular. Except you wanted to pin this to CVEs?!

as `k8s.io/api` from one minor version to another.

In effect, this means a new minor version will at least be released for all Flux
controllers approximately every four months, following each Kubernetes minor version release.
To properly validate the controllers against the latest Kubernetes version,
we typically allocate a time window of around two weeks for end-to-end testing of Flux controllers.

It is worth noting that in certain scenarios where project dependencies are not in sync with
the Kubernetes version or conflicts arise, this two-week timeframe may prove insufficient,
requiring additional time to address the issues appropriately.

### Major releases

Major releases are intended for drastic changes in the controller behaviour or security stance.

A controller major release will be announced ahead of time throughout all communication channels,
and a support window of one year will be provided for the previous major version.

## Release cadence

Flux controllers are at least released at the same rate as Kubernetes, following their cadence of three
minor releases per year. After each Kubernetes minor release, all controllers are tested against the latest

> Kubernetes version and are released at approximately two weeks after Kubernetes.

Reviewer 2: Not relevant to this PR getting merged or not but we have to make sure that we have a process in place that ensures we're following what is stated here. At the moment we have no formal release management or calendar or anything like that in place so as it is now it would depend on someone recalling to do this after each K8s release.

An alpha version API becomes deprecated once a subsequent alpha or beta API version is released.
A deprecated alpha version is subject to removal after a three months period.

An alpha API is introduced when its proposal reaches the  `implementable` phase in the
[Flux RFC process](https://github.com/fluxcd/flux2/tree/main/rfcs).
We encourage users to try out the alpha APIs and provide feedback which is extremely
valuable during early stages of development.

### Beta version

A beta version API e.g. `v2beta1` is considered well tested and safe to be used.

The schema of objects may change in incompatible ways in a subsequent beta or stable API version.
The Flux Custom Resources may require editing after a CRD update for which migration instructions will be
provided as part of the controller changelog.

A beta version API becomes deprecated once a subsequent beta or stable API version is released. 
A deprecated beta version is subject to removal after a six months period.

### Stable version

A stable version API e.g. `v2` is considered feature complete.

Any changes to the object schema do not require editing or re-creating of Flux Custom Resources.

> Schema fields can't be removed, only new fields can be added with a default value that

Author: Kubernetes `v1` Service, StatefulSet even Pod got new fields without a version bump. Feature complete means that what's in the current RFC was implemented, it doesn't mean freezed for ever.

> Schema fields can't be removed, only new fields can be added with a default value that

Author: Flux does not provides conversion webhooks, we avoid them by having the APIs backwards compatible.

- `vX.Y.Z-RC.W` release candidates e.g. `v1.0.0-RC.1`
- `vX.Y.Z` stable releases e.g. `v1.0.0`

The API versioning and controller versioning are indirectly related. For example,
a source-controller minor release `v1.1.0` can introduce a new API version
`v1beta1` for a Kind `XRepository` in the `source.toolkit.fluxcd.io` group.

### Release candidates

Release candidates are intended for testing new features or improvements before a final release.

In most cases, a maintainer will publish a release candidate of a controller for Flux users
to tests it on their staging clusters. Release candidates are not meant to be deployed in production
unless advised to do so by a maintainer.

### Patch releases

Patch releases are intended for critical bug fixes to the latest minor version, such as addressing security
vulnerabilities or fixes to severe problems with no workaround.

Patch releases do not contain breaking changes, feature additions or any type of user-facing changes.
If a CVE fix requires a breaking change, then a minor release will provide the fix.

We expect users to be running the latest patch release of a given minor release as soon as the

> controller release is included in a Flux patch release.

Reviewer 3: Maybe?
```suggestion
controller release is included in a Flux CLI patch release.
```

Author: It's a Flux release which has nothing to do with the CLI binary. People can setup Flux to update itself from `ghcr.io/fluxcd/flux-manifests`, or they can use Flux TF provider or even the community maintained Helm charts.

### Minor releases

Minor releases are intended for backwards compatible feature additions and improvements.
Note that breaking changes may occur if required by a security vulnerability fix.

Minor releases are used when updating Kubernetes dependencies such as `k8s.io/api` from one minor version to another.

In effect, this means a minor version will be released for all Flux controllers approximately every four months
after each Kubernetes minor version release. To properly validate the controllers against the latest Kubernetes version,
we reserve a time window of at least two weeks for Flux controllers end-to-end testing. 

### Major releases

Major releases are intended for drastic changes in the controller behaviour or security stance.

A controller major release will be announced ahead of time throughout all communication channels,
and a support window of one year will be provided for the previous major version.

## Release cadence

> Flux controllers follow Kubernetes three releases per year cadence. After each Kubernetes minor release,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Flux controllers are at least released at the same rate as Kubernetes, following their cadence of three minor releases per year.
```

> all controllers are tested against the latest Kubernetes version and are released at approximately two

Author: We do https://github.com/fluxcd/flux2/blob/main/.github/workflows/e2e-arm64.yaml#L20

> weeks after Kubernetes. The newly released controllers offer support for Kubernetes N-2 minor versions.

Reviewer 3: We probably highlight that we follow Kubernetes' support policy, which at the moment is N-2 minor versions.

> A Flux controller may have more than three minor releases per year, if maintainers decide to ship a 

Author: Please suggest changes. What I wanted to say is that we'll do at least 3 releases (following Kubernetes), but besides that, we could do a minor release per week if we have new features to release.

> A Flux controller may have more than three minor releases per year, if maintainers decide to ship a 

Author: Please see the latest edits

new feature or optimisation ahead of schedule.

## Supported releases

For Flux controllers we support the last three minor releases.

> Security fixes, may be backported to those three minor versions as patch releases,

Reviewer 4: We could add some examples here similar to the Kubernetes docs ? https://kubernetes.io/releases/

Author: We can't, release dates are not set in stone, some dependency like client-go could break compatibility with other Flux deps such as Helm, so we need to wait for all deps to sync.

> depending on severity and feasibility.

Reviewer 3: Security patching and back-porting to the previous 2 minor releases, across all controllers, may be quite a big undertake given the size of the security team when considering all the additional work required around CVE handling and CVD.

From an OSS perspective, I think back porting to a single minor release sounds more achievable. Companies providing enterprise support for Flux users could bridge that gap for users requiring longer back-porting support.

Author: > Security patching and back-porting to the previous 2 minor releases, across all controllers, may be quite a big undertake given the size of the security team 

I don't think the actual back porting is a task that only the security team members can do. A security team member can create an issue asking the maintainers of a controller to do the back port and release. Now it's possible that maintainers don't have spare time to perform this task and no other contributor volunteers to do the back port. If this is the case, then back porting is not feasible due to a shortage of contributors, which is covered by the "depending on severity and feasibility".  I could expend on this if you want and explicitly call out "best-effort / community-driven".

Reviewer 3: My main concern is about the security assurances we provide to our users as part of our CVE handling process.
During the embargo window the security team keep the CVE information private and patch all the supported versions - which currently is only one. It is only after the embargo is lifted and the CVE is public, that it could be back-ported on a "best-effort / community-driven" way. But by that time, users using older versions would already be exposed to an unpatched public CVE. 

Now for both security and bug fixes, the more we expand on this promise, the lesser our long-term capacity. 
I think we should pledge a more sustainable version range, and then mention that back-porting to older versions would be:
- provided by the community in a best-effort basis.
- provided by companies focused on Flux products and Services directed at enterprises (as in [this](https://fluxcd.io/support/#my-employer-needs-additional-help)).

But it would be good to hear from other security team members (cc @hiddeco @scottrigby).

Reviewer: Think there is a separation here between two things:

1. CVEs which are directly the result of (not so) happy mistakes in our code.
2. CVEs from upstream dependencies.

---

For scenario 1, having means to automatically back-port things through GitHub labeling may work in about 75% of the cases. I think we could pull this of in a relatively effortless way, as I have seen other projects do.

In terms of this exposing indicators around security issues, the same could be said for closely following commits and/or pull requests. In addition, given it is likely that once this is in place we also leverage this to fix critical (non-security) bugs. Any indicators would blend together with non-CVE things.

This makes me lean towards the idea of this being a non-issue in terms of exposure, or at least outweighing the discomfort of people having to closely follow our minor ranges. Especially given our (at times) aggressive release cadence.

---

For scenario 2, I think this is more of an issue in terms of human workload. Every minor range of a controller may have their own supported minor range of some dependencies, and some of these dependencies may or may not have their procedures around back-porting security fixes. This means that:

1. We have to manually update versions within the minor range of the dependency.
2.  We may not be able to resolve the issue, as it would require updating beyond the point of a version range of the dependency which is accepted within the range of the controller.
3. All of this would be an exponential effort.

---

All together, I think that we should pledge `n-2` for scenario 1, but keep scenario two at `n-1` + best effort.

## Release artifacts

Each controller release produces the following artifacts:

- Source code (GitHub Releases page)
- Software Bill of Materials in SPDX format (GitHub Releases page)
- Kubernetes manifests such as CRDs and Deployments (GitHub Releases page)
- Signed checksums of source code, SBOM and manifests (GitHub Releases page)
- Multi-arch container images (GitHub Container Registry and DockerHub)

All the artifacts are cryptographically signed and can be verified with Cosign.

The release artifacts can be accessed based on the controller name and version.

To import or update a controller's API package in a Go project:

```shell
go get github.com/fluxcd/<controller-name>/api@<version>
```

To verify and pull a controller's container image:

```shell
cosign verify ghcr.io/fluxcd/<controller-name>:<version>
docker pull ghcr.io/fluxcd/<controller-name>:<version>
```

To download a controller's Kubernetes Custom resource definitions:

```shell
curl -sL https://github.com/fluxcd/<controller-name>/releases/download/<version>/<controller-name>.crds.yaml

> ```

Reviewer 2: I feel this would be a better fit for the website and then we can link from here. That way we can keep it current and have it a little more prominent.

## Controller release procedure

> As a project maintainer, to release a controller and its API:

Reviewer 2: It's good to have this documented centrally here. We should make sure to link here from the DEVELOPMENT.md files in the controllers' repos.

6. [fluxcd/image-automation-controller](https://github.com/fluxcd/image-automation-controller) (imports `fluxcd/source-controller/api` and `fluxcd/image-reflector-controller/api`)

## API versioning 

The Flux APIs (Kubernetes CRDs) follow the
[Kubernetes API versioning](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/#api-versioning) scheme.

### Alpha version

An alpha version API e.g. `v1alpha1` is considered experimental and should be used on
test environments only.

The schema of objects may change in incompatible ways in a later controller release.
The Custom Resources may require editing and re-creating after a CRD update.

An alpha version API becomes deprecated once a subsequent alpha or beta API version is released.
A deprecated alpha version is subject to removal after a three months period.

An alpha API is introduced when its proposal reaches the  `implementable` phase in the
[Flux RFC process](https://github.com/fluxcd/flux2/tree/main/rfcs).
We encourage users to try out the alpha APIs and provide feedback
(e.g. on CNCF Slack or in the form of GitHub issues/discussions)
which is extremely valuable during early stages of development.

### Beta version

> A beta version API e.g. `v2beta1` is considered well tested and safe to be used.

Reviewer 5: It's not clear where it's safe to be used considering the above paragraph regarding alpha versions only being used in testing environments.
```suggestion
A beta version API e.g. `v2beta1` is considered well-tested and safe to use in production.
```

### Release candidates

Release candidates are intended for testing new features or improvements before a final release.

In most cases, a maintainer will publish a release candidate of a controller for Flux users
to tests it on their staging clusters. Release candidates are not meant to be deployed in production
unless advised to do so by a maintainer.

### Patch releases

Patch releases are intended for critical bug fixes to the latest minor version, such as addressing security
vulnerabilities or fixes to severe problems with no workaround.

Patch releases do not contain breaking changes, feature additions or any type of user-facing changes.
If a CVE fix requires a breaking change, then a minor release will provide the fix.

We expect users to be running the latest patch release of a given minor release as soon as the
controller release is included in a Flux patch release.

### Minor releases

Minor releases are intended for backwards compatible feature additions and improvements.
Note that breaking changes may occur if required by a security vulnerability fix.

Minor releases are used when updating Kubernetes dependencies such as `k8s.io/api` from one minor version to another.

> In effect, this means a minor version will be released for all Flux controllers approximately every four months
> after each Kubernetes minor version release. To properly validate the controllers against the latest Kubernetes version,
> we reserve a time window of at least two weeks for Flux controllers end-to-end testing. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In effect, this means a new minor version will at least be released for all Flux controllers approximately every four months, following each Kubernetes minor version release. To properly validate the controllers against the latest Kubernetes version, we typically allocate a time window of at least two weeks for end-to-end testing of Flux controllers.

It is worth noting that in certain scenarios where project dependencies are not in sync with the Kubernetes version or conflicts arise, this two-week timeframe may prove insufficient, requiring additional time to address the issues appropriately.
```

### Major releases

Major releases are intended for drastic changes in the controller behaviour or security stance.

A controller major release will be announced ahead of time throughout all communication channels,
and a support window of one year will be provided for the previous major version.

## Release cadence

> Flux controllers are at least released at the same rate as Kubernetes, following their cadence of three
> minor releases per year. After each Kubernetes minor release, all controllers are tested against the latest
> Kubernetes version and are released at approximately two weeks after Kubernetes.
> The newly released controllers offer support for Kubernetes N-2 minor versions.
> 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Flux controllers are at least released at the same rate as Kubernetes, following their cadence of three
minor releases per year. After each Kubernetes minor release, all controllers are tested against the latest
Kubernetes version and then released approximately two weeks after Kubernetes.
The newly released controllers offer support for Kubernetes N-2 minor versions.

```

A Flux controller may have more than three minor releases per year, if maintainers decide to ship a 
new feature or optimisation ahead of schedule.

## Supported releases

For Flux controllers we support the last three minor releases.

> Security fixes, may be back-ported to those three minor versions as patch releases,
> depending on severity and feasibility.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Security fixes may be back-ported to those three minor versions as patch releases,
depending on severity and feasibility.
```

Note that back-porting is provided by the community on a best-effort basis.

## Release artifacts

Each controller release produces the following artifacts:

- Source code (GitHub Releases page)
- Software Bill of Materials in SPDX format (GitHub Releases page)
- Kubernetes manifests such as CRDs and Deployments (GitHub Releases page)
- Signed checksums of source code, SBOM and manifests (GitHub Releases page)
- Multi-arch container images (GitHub Container Registry and DockerHub)

All the artifacts are cryptographically signed and can be verified with Cosign.

The release artifacts can be accessed based on the controller name and version.

To import or update a controller's API package in a Go project:

```shell
go get github.com/fluxcd/<controller-name>/api@<version>
```

To verify and pull a controller's container image:

```shell
cosign verify ghcr.io/fluxcd/<controller-name>:<version>
docker pull ghcr.io/fluxcd/<controller-name>:<version>
```

To download a controller's Kubernetes Custom resource definitions:

```shell
curl -sL https://github.com/fluxcd/<controller-name>/releases/download/<version>/<controller-name>.crds.yaml
```

> ## Controller release procedure

Reviewer: I would move this to a separate document (e.g. `process.md`), as the audience is different.

As a project maintainer, to release a controller and its API:

1. Checkout the `main` branch and pull changes from remote.
2. Create a new branch from `main` i.e. `release-<next semver>`. This
   will function as your release preparation branch.
3. Update the `github.com/fluxcd/<NAME>-controller/api` version in `go.mod`
4. Add an entry to the `CHANGELOG.md` for the new release and change the
   `newTag` value in ` config/manager/kustomization.yaml` to that of the
   semver release you are going to make. Commit and push your changes.
5. Create a PR for your release branch and get it merged into `main`.
6. Create a `api/<next semver>` tag for the merge commit in `main` and push it to remote.
7. Create a `<next semver>` tag for the merge commit in `main` and push it to remote.
8. Confirm CI builds and releases the newly tagged version.

> 

Reviewer 5: It might be useful to add some information about handling backporting changes e.g. branch naming conventions, cherry-picking commits. Not sure where the right place for that would be.
